1. Language models (LMs) are used in various fields, including IR and NLP. Use the explanation/definition of LM in one field to explain them in the other in a couple of paragraphs (no more than half a page). Start by reading the assigned readings this week and see what are some of the fundamental aspects of an LM, regardless of its application. Do not copy things from any of the articles or other places on the Internet (generated or found). Instead, use your own words to explain, as if you are asked this question in a job interview. [4 points]

Solution - 
Language models (LMs) are foundational tools used for both Information Retrieval (IR) and Natural Language Processing (NLP). In the case of Information Retrieval, a language model would be used to estimate the relevance of documents to user queries based on the statistical properties of language. Here, an IR language model computes the likelihood of generating a document given a query, emphasizing the distribution of words and phrases within textual data. This probabilistic model allows IR systems to rank and retrieve documents according to their linguistic similarity. thus, making it relevant to the user's input query, and enhancing the effectiveness of information retrieval tasks.

In Natural language Processing (NLP), language models are important for use cases such as text generation and understanding. NLP language models are trained to predict the next word or sequence of words in a given context. They leverage the use of deep learning architectures such as encoder-decoder models or Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). 
The NLP language models are great at contextual relevance and thus are used for applications like machine translation, sentiment analysis, and conversational AI. 

Eventually, language models in both cases (IR and NLP) incorporate the main principles, - language processing—capturing semantics, syntax, and context for generating and understanding communication tasks and for information retrieval in their respective domains.
